Connector builder: Tutorial (#25153)
airbytehq/airbyte: docs/connector-development/connector-builder-ui/tutorial.md

* Set the connector name to "Exchange rates"

Your connector builder project is now set up. The next steps describe how to configure your connector to extract records from the Exchange Rates API.

## Setting up global configuration

On the "global configuration" page, general settings applying to all streams are configured - the base URL requests are sent to as well as configuration for how to authenticate with the API server.

* Set the base URL to `https://api.apilayer.com`
* Select the "API Key" authentication method
* Set the "Header" to `apikey`

The actual API Key you copied from apilayer.com will not be part of the connector itself - instead it will be set as part of the source configuration when configuring a connection based on your connector in a later step.

## Setting up and testing a stream

Now that you configured how to talk the API, let's set up the stream of records that will be sent to a destination later on. To do so, click the button with the plus icon next to the "Streams" section in the side menu and fill out the form:
* Set the name to "Rates"
* Set the "URL path" to `/exchangerates_data/latest`
* Submit

> * Set the "Record selector" to `rates`

Author: I wanted to keep this out of the tutorial as it would require you to go into detail of what a primary key is doing. Let's leave that for the "Record selection" page

> * Set the "Record selector" to `rates`

Author: agreed, not necessary for the scope of the tutorial

Now the basic stream is configured and can be tested. To send test requests, suppliy testing values by clicking the "Testing values" button in top right and pasting your API key in the input.

This form corresponds to what a user of this connector will need to provide when setting up a connection later on. The testing values are not saved along with the connector project.

> Now, click the "Test" button to trigger a test read to simulate what will happen during a sync. After a little while, you should see a single record that looks like this:

Author: yeah, let's leave it out

## Declaring the record schema

Each stream of a connector needs to declare how emitted records will look like (which properties do they have, what data types will be used, ...). During a sync, this information will be passed on to the destination to configure it correctly - for example a SQL database destination can use it to properly set up the destination table, assigning the right type to each column. This process is called "normalization"

By default, the stream schema is set to a simple object with unspecified properties. However, the connector builder can infer the schema based on the test read you just issued. To use the infered schema, switch to the "Detected schema" tab and click the "Import schema" button.

The warning icon disappears indicating that the declared schema of your stream matches the test data.

## Making the stream configurable

The exchange rate API supports configuring a different base currency via request parameter - let's make this part of the user inputs that can be controlled by the user of the connector when configuring a source, similar to the API key.

> To do so, follow these steps:

Reviewer: The tutorial actually instructs the reader to click on the `Detected schema` tab in the testing side-panel, not the `Declared schema` tab in the stream config view. 

But I did the same thing when going through the tutorial, so we may just want to instruct users to open both view and to switch back to Configuration after importing the schema

* Scroll down to the "Request parameters" section and add a new request parameter
* Set the key to `base`
* For the value, click the user icon in the input and select "New user input"

> * Set the name to "Base"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Set the name to "Base"
* Click "Create"
```

> * Set the name to "Base"

Author: I originally had that but removed it as it's not important (it's fairly easy to understand) and I want to keep it focused. I think we can keep it in the screenshots / the video walkthrough though

Now your connector has a second configuration input. To test it, click the "Testing values" button again, set the "Base" to `USD`. Then, click the "Test" button again to issue a new test read.

> The record should update to use USD as the base currency:

Reviewer: This also resulted in some diffs in my schema, such as:
<img width="463" alt="Screen Shot 2023-04-14 at 5 11 26 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/22731524/232172933-073dbcb2-5e2b-4553-88d2-298b1fb38b60.png">

This could be a good opportunity to explain that in this case, we want to keep the old schema since we want it to be wider, so the warning of the schemas being different should be ignored. This does also add a bit more complexity to the tutorial though so I'm also fine with leaving it out - no strong feelings.

To configure your connector to request every day individually, follow these steps:
* Enable "Incremental sync" for the Rates stream
* Set the "Cursor field" to `date` - this is the property in our records to check what date got synced last
* Set the "Datetime format" to `%Y-%m-%d` to match the format of the date in the record returned from the API
* Set the "Cursor granularity" to `P1D` to tell the connector the API only supports daily increments
* Make the start time configurable by clicking the user icon in the "Start datetime" input and creating a new user input called `Start date`
* Set the "End datetime" to `{{ today_utc() }}` to always sync up to the current day
* In a lot of cases the start and end date are injected into the request body or request parameters. However in the case of the exchange rate API it needs to be added to the path of the request, so disable the "Inject start/end time into outgoing HTTP request" options
* On top of the form, change the "Path URL" input to `/exchangerates_data/{{ stream_slice.start_time }}` to inject the date to fetch data for into the path of the request

> * Open the "Advanced" section and set "Step" to `P1D` to configure the connector to do one separate request per day

Reviewer 2: maybe mention that it'll partition the dataset. 1 partition = 1 day

> * Open the "Advanced" section and set "Step" to `P1D` to configure the connector to do one separate request per day

Reviewer: Agreed that we should set the Step before editing the path since the user is already looking at this part of the UI

> * Set a start date (like `2023-03-03`) in the "Testing values" menu

Reviewer 2: let's make this a more recent date so it's faster. Maybe 2023-04-01?

Author: This is a losing battle - in a month we are back to square one. Also, I don't think a more recent date would make it faster necessarily, this is just the API

> * Hit the "Test" button to trigger a new test read

Reviewer 2: I'm getting an error

![Screen Shot 2023-04-14 at 11 01 08 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1451943/232122224-6c669506-688c-4883-8861-76ae0e66b751.png)

Reviewer 2: Not great, but I was able to fix by formatting the end datetime

![Screen Shot 2023-04-14 at 11 04 24 AM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1451943/232122843-e6dca4f6-da94-4007-a8f7-b2745d25310b.png)

Reviewer: I didn't hit any error during this step of the tutorial... not sure why it would be different for us (I'm using CDK version 0.34.1 if that helps). Here is my manifest at this point:
[exchange_rates.yaml.txt](https://github.com/airbytehq/airbyte/files/11237884/exchange_rates.yaml.txt)

Author: You didn't set `today_utc` for the end date @girarda - however, I don't think it matters as we are going to remove this before the release to avoid this kind of error.

Author: Note: We will need to adjust the tutorial a bit once that's done, but I think we don't need to block on anything

> Now, you should see a dropdown above the records view that lets you step through the daily exchange rates along with the requests performed to fetch this data. Note that in the connector builder at most 5 slices are requested to speed up testing. During a proper sync the full time range between your configured start date and the current day will be executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, you should see a dropdown above the records view that lets you step through the daily exchange rates along with the requests performed to fetch this data. Note that in the connector builder at most 5 partitions are requested to speed up testing. During a proper sync the full time range between your configured start date and the current day will be executed.
```

When used in a connection, the connector will make sure exchange rates for the same day are not requested multiple times - the date of the last fetched record will be stored and the next scheduled sync will pick up from where the previous one stopped.

## Adding transformations

> Note that a warning icon should show next to the "Detected schema" tab - using the per-date endpoint instead of the latest endpoint slightly changed the shape of the records by adding a `historical` property. As we don't need this property in our destination, we can remove it using a transformation.

Reviewer 2: nit: the icon might be a little too subtle. I don't think I would've noticed

To do so, follow these steps:
* Enable the "Transformations" section

> * Add a new transformation

Reviewer: Not a note for this tutorial doc, but I feel like it would be slightly more intuitive behavior if clicking the checkbox to enable Transformations caused a single empty transformation to be added automatically, rather than also requiring the user to click `+ New transformation` after enabling it. WDYT?

Author: That probably makes sense, could you create an issue / PR for this?

* Set the "Path" to `historical`
* Trigger a new test read

> The `historical` property in the records tab and the schema warning should disappear.

Reviewer 2: I didn't see the historical field. Was I supposed to remove the record selector?

Reviewer: Yeah I had removed the record selector earlier and I see the historical property.

I ran into a different issue while following this though: I typed the word "historical" into the Path input, and then clicked Test as the tutorial instructed, but the data that was shown still included the `historical` field which was very confusing.

I realized that this was because I never actually "submitted" my changes to the Path array input, so the test ran with the old empty value. I have created an issue for this problem which I'll bring to grooming: https://github.com/airbytehq/airbyte/issues/25228

Author: Eh, record selector should not be set to dates, sorry

## Publishing and syncing

So far, the connector is only configured as part of the connector builder project. To make it possible to use it in actual connections, you need to publish the connector. This captures the current state of the configuration and makes the connector available as a custom connector within the current Airbyte workspace.

To use the connector for a proper sync, follow these steps:

> * Click the "Publish" button and publish the first version of the "Stock Exchange" connector

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Click the "Publish" button and publish the first version of the "Exchange Rates (Tutorial)" connector
```

* Go to the "Connections" page and create a new connection

> * As Source type, pick the "Stock Exchange" connector you just created

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* As Source type, pick the "Exchange Rates (Tutorial)" connector you just created
```

* Set API Key, base currency and start date for the sync - to avoid a large number of requests, set the start date to one week in the past
* Click "Set up source" and wait for the connection check to validate the provided configuration is valid
* Set up a destination - to keep things simple let's choose the "E2E Testing" destination type
* Click "Set up destination", keeping the default configurations

> * Wait for Airbyte to check the record schema, then click "Set up connection" - this will create the connection and kick off the first sync

Reviewer 2: we should tell the user to change the replication frequency to `Manual`

Author: It didn't seem relevant for the tutorial - that would add two additional steps (setting it to manual and triggering a sync) which can be avoided

> * After a short while, the sync should complete successfully

Reviewer: When I did this, I opened the logs of my job to see the output record and I instead just found a bunch of these deserialization errors:
<img width="2197" alt="Screen Shot 2023-04-14 at 5 39 37 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/22731524/232174593-bc10d061-3fd1-4b69-a1a4-3259fc2b111b.png">

A cursory search on slack revealed this may be because the records are large: https://airbytehq-team.slack.com/archives/C048E3BK1KM/p1680822782177669?thread_ts=1680814742.350359&cid=C048E3BK1KM

It would be nice if users didn't see a bunch of error messages during this tutorial - maybe we can ask the platform team for help here? Only other alternatives I'm imagining are using a different connector with smaller output records (but that would mean rewriting most of this tutorial) or trying to configure the record selector to somehow split up the rates into separate records, but I couldn't figure out an easy way to do that

Author: I don't think this is related to the size of the record, our records are fairly small.

I think it's a bug of the e2e destination - the platform tries to interpret its log messages as airbyte messages:
```
2023-04-17 11:10:13 ERROR i.a.w.i.VersionedAirbyteStreamFactory(toAirbyteMessage):360 - Deserialization failed: "2023-04-17 11:10:13 \u001B[32mINFO\u001B[m i.a.i.d.e.TestingDestinations(main):71 - starting destination: class io.airbyte.integrations.destination.e2e_test.TestingDestinations"
```

You can see that the log message `starting destination: class io.airbyte.integrations.destination.e2e_test.TestingDestinations` gets parsed as an Airbyte message which fails. I'm not sure who can help, I will ask the destinations team.

I think we should fix this bug in the e2e connector rather than switching away from it as there is no destination that works without configuration which keeps the tutorial focused.

Congratulations! You just completed the following steps:
* Configured a production-ready connector to extract currency exchange data from an HTTP-based API:
  * Configurable API key, start date and base currency
  * Incremental sync to keep the number of requests small
  * Schema declaration to enable normalization in the destination
* Tested whether the connector works correctly in the UI
* Made the working connector available to configure sources in the workspace
* Set up a connection using the published connector and synced data from the Exchange Rates API

## Next steps

This tutorial didn't go into depth about all features that can be used in the connector builder. Check out the concept pages for more information about certain topics:

> * Authentication

Reviewer 2: nit: let's add links to these

Author: yeah, I will do that once everything is merged together (can't point to non-existing pages as there's a link checker testing these)
